@document.meta
title: regex
description: 
authors: Kratosgado
categories: 
created: 2025-12-17T07:48:59+0000
updated: 2025-12-17T07:48:59+0000
version: 1.1.1
@end

# REGEX (Regular Expressions)

## What is a Regular Expression?
- A regular expression is a pattern that describes a set of strings.
- Regex allows pattern matching, searching, validation, and text manipulation. Here's a structured overview of the main things to know for a presentation.

# REGEX in Java (Core Classes)
The primary classes are immutable and thread-safe where appropriate.

- Pattern: 
  > Represents a compiled regex. No public constructor—use Pattern.compile(String regex) or Pattern.compile(String regex, int flags).
  > Throws PatternSyntaxException if the regex is invalid.

- Matcher: Engine that interprets the pattern and performs matching operations on the input strings (CharSequence).
  > Created via pattern.matcher(String input).

- PatternSyntaxException: Unchecked exception for syntax errors.
  > Quick static check: boolean matches = Pattern.matches("\\d+", "123"); (true if entire string matches).

### Metacharacters
- Metacharacters are special characters that have a special meaning in a regular expression.
- They are used to define the syntax of the regular expression.

#### . 
- The dot metacharacter matches any character except a newline.

#### ^
- The caret metacharacter matches the beginning of a line.

#### $
- The dollar sign metacharacter matches the end of a line.

#### * 
- The asterisk metacharacter matches zero or more of the preceding element.

#### +
- The plus sign metacharacter matches one or more of the preceding element.

#### ?
- The question mark metacharacter matches zero or one of the preceding element.

#### { }
- The curly braces metacharacters define a set of elements to be matched.
  - The curly braces define a set of elements to be matched.
  - The curly braces define a set of elements to be matched.
    - { a, b, c } matches any of the characters a, b, or c.
    - { a | b | c } matches any of the characters a, b, or c.
    - { ^a } matches any character except a.
    - { ^a | ^b } matches any character except a or b.
    - { a* } matches zero or more a's.
    - { a+ } matches one or more a's.
    - { a? } matches zero or one a's.
    - { ^a* } matches zero or more a's, but not a's at the beginning of the string.
    - { ^a+ } matches one or more a's, but not a's at the beginning of the string.
- { ^a } matches any character except a.
- { ^a | ^b } matches any character except a or b.
- { a* } matches zero or more a's.
- { a+ } matches one or more a's.
- { a? } matches zero or one a's.
- { ^a* } matches zero or more a's, but not a's at the beginning of the string.
- { ^a+ } matches one or more a's, but not a's at the beginning of the string.  

### Character Classes
- Character classes are used to match a specific character or set of characters.
- Character classes are defined using the following syntax:
  - \[ character class ] matches any character in the class.
  - \[^ character class ] matches any character not in the class.
  - \[ character class ] matches any character in the class.
  - \[ character class ] matches any character in the class.

#### \d
- Matches any digit character.

#### \D
- Matches any non-digit character.

#### \w
- Matches any alphanumeric character.

#### \W
- Matches any non-alphanumeric character.

#### \s
- Matches any whitespace character.

#### \S
- Matches any non-whitespace character.

#### \b
- Matches a word boundary.

#### \B
- Matches a non-word boundary.

#### \A
- Matches the beginning of the input.

#### \Z
- Matches the end of the input.

#### \z
- Matches the end of the input, or before a newline at the end of the input.

#### \G
- Matches the position where the last match finished.

#### \1
- Matches the same text matched by the first capturing group of the regular expression.

#### \2
- Matches the same text matched by the second capturing group of the regular expression.

