@document.meta
title: stack
description: 
authors: esslifie
categories: 
created: 2025-12-03T07:57:50+0000
updated: 2025-12-03T07:57:50+0000
version: 1.1.1
@end

# Stack
The `Stack` class represents a last-in-first-out (LIFO) stack of objects.
It extends class `Vector` with five operations that allow a vector to be treated as a stack.
The usual `push` and `pop` operations are provided, as well as a method to `peek` at the top item on the stack,
a method to test for whether the stack is `empty`, and a method to `search` the stack for an item and discover how far it is from the top.

When a stack is first created, it contains no items.

A more complete and consistent set of LIFO stack operations is provided by the `Deque` interface and its implementations, which should be used in preference to this class. For example:

## Core Principles
 - The behavior of a stack can be visualized like a physical stack of plates: you can only add a new plate to the top, and you can only take a plate from the top. 
 - LIFO (Last-In, First-Out): The fundamental rule that governs how elements are accessed.
 - Single-Ended Access: All insertions (push) and deletions (pop) happen at a single end, referred to as the "top" of the stack

## Key Operations (Methods)
 - The java.util.Stack class provides several methods for managing its elements: 
 - push(E item): Adds an element to the top of the stack.
 - pop(): Removes and returns the element from the top of the stack. It throws an EmptyStackException if the stack is empty.
 - peek(): Returns the element at the top of the stack without removing it. It also throws an EmptyStackException if the stack is empty.
 - empty(): Tests if the stack is empty and returns a boolean value (true if empty, false otherwise).
 - search(Object o): Returns the 1-based position of an element from the top of the stack. If the item is not found, it returns -1
