@document.meta
title: arraylist
description: 
authors: esslifie
categories: 
created: 2025-11-26T08:38:24+0000
updated: 2025-11-26T08:38:24+0000
version: 1.1.1
@end

In Java, ArrayList is a class in the Java Collections Framework that implements the List interface 📝.
It provides the functionality of a resizable array, meaning it's a dynamic structure that can automatically grow or shrink in size,
unlike standard Java arrays which have a fixed size.

Key Features of ArrayList:

- Resizable: 
  It can automatically grow or shrink in size as elements are added or removed.
- Not-synchronized: 
  It is not synchronized, which means multiple threads can access it concurrently without causing issues.
- Dynamic Size:
  It can automatically grow or shrink in size as elements are added or removed.
- Access:
  it offers O(1) constant-time access to elements by index, which means it can be accessed in constant time.
- Insertion/Deletion: O(n) in middle .

Synchronization:
Unlike Vector(legacy), ArrayList is not synchronized, which means multiple threads can access it concurrently without causing issues.
To ensure thread safety, you can use the synchronized keyword to synchronize access to the ArrayList.

@code java
    List<Integer> list = Collections.synchronizedList(new ArrayList<>());
    synchronized (list) {
      var it = list.iterator();
      it.hasNext();
      list.add(1);
      list.add(2);
      list.add(3);
    }

the syncronized keyword is used to synchronize access to the list, which ensures that only one thread can access the list at a time.

Core methods:
  all methods on List interface

Special Methods:
  - void ensureCapacity(int minCapacity)
    Pre-allocates the internal array to ensure that it can hold at least minCapacity elements without resizing.
    Used when you know you'll be adding a large number of elements to avaoid multiple O(n) resizes. 
  
  - void trimToSize()
    Trims the capacity of this ArrayList instance to be the list's current size. 
    This can be used to minimize the storage of an ArrayList instance.
